# Deciphering culprits for cyanobacterial blooms and lake vulnerability under future warming scenarios

Cyanobacterial blooms (CBs) have a growing global prevalence, emerging as a significant environmental concern due to their potential toxicity. Understanding how the different mechanisms affect CBs is crucial to develop actionable management strategies. For this, we derive a stoichiometric dynamical system that describes the qualitative population dynamics of cyanobacteria and their toxicity in north-temperate freshwater ecosystems. Our model quantifies the hypoxic effects of CBs on fish mortality and the effect of microcystin-LR (MC-LR), a potent toxin produced by cyanobacteria on aquatic macro-invertebrates, phytoplankton, and fish species. By fitting the model to lakes with varying physical characteristics, eutrophic conditions, and water temperature, we can delineate and understand the driving components of CBs. We show that decreasing water exchange rate, depth of epilimnion, or light attenuation promotes bloom intensity and duration. Furthermore, our models concur that eutrophication and increasing water temperatures exacerbate the intensity of CBs. We observe a severe bioaccumulative effect of MC-LR in aquatic species, stressing the potential impact on humans and other terrestrial animals. We validate our model with field measurements demonstrating its applicability to several lake conditions. These insights are essential for informing targeted interventions to reduce CBs and their ecological impacts.
